33 million people including 60
of the 45 to 49 year olds
and we know that this vaccination
program
is making a big difference we know that
it's helping to reduce suffering and
save lives
potentially on a on a very big scale but
we don't
yet know the full extent of the
protection
that we're building up the exact
strength
of our defenses and as we look at what's
happening in other countries
with cases now record numbers
around the world we cannot delude
ourselves that kovid has gone away
i see nothing in the data now
that makes me think we are going to have
to
deviate in any way from the road map
cautious but irreversible that we have
set out
but the majority of scientific opinion
in this country is still firmly of the
view
that there will be another wave of covid
at some stage
this year and so we must as far as
possible
learn to live with this disease as we
live with other diseases
we'll be bolstering our defenses with
booster jabs this austin
this autumn i will be continuing with
testing
and today i want to announce what we
hope will be a further line
of medical defense the united kingdom
was the first country in the world
to pioneer dexamethasone which has saved
a million lives globally and today
we're creating a new anti-virals task
force
to search for the most promising new
medicines and support
their development through clinical
trials with the aim of making them
safely and rapidly available as early
as the autumn this means for example
that
if you test positive there might be a
tablet you could take at home
to stop the virus in its tracks
and significantly reduce the chance of
infection turning into more severe
disease
or if you're living with someone who has
tested positive
there might be a pill you could take for
a few days
to stop you getting the disease yourself
and by focusing on these antivirals
these new antivirals
we hope to lengthen the uk's lead in in
medicines and in life sciences
and to give ever greater confidence to
the people of this country
that we continue on our path towards
freedom
we've taken a big step again this month
reopening
significant parts of our country and for
many people
this last week has brought the first
glimmerings of a return
to normality having a pint having a
haircut making that
trip to the shops every day
science is helping us to get
back towards normality and i believe
that
antiviral treatments can play an
important part
and if we keep going follow the rules
remember hands
face space fresh air then
we can keep each other safe and see
through
our road map to reclaim our lives
in full thank you very much i'm now
going to hand over to nikki
thank you and my name is it's dr nikki
kanani i'm a gp and medical director for
primary care
in the nhs in england and since the last
time i came to one of these briefings
i've been working with colleagues
across the nhs to roll out the biggest
vaccination program
in the nhs history i've been vaccinating
at local vaccination services
alongside many of you offering people
second aces
vaccinating people in care homes but
also making sure that my patients can
get the care that they need
from the nhs when they need it it was on
the 8th of february when i was last on a
podium a little bit like this
that i was able to say that we were on
track to meet our targets
and since then the program continues to
go from strength to strength
with the nhs meeting our first two
deadlines on vaccination
on vaccinating the most at risk people
the public response has been incredible
and i thank you if you've come forward
for your first dose
and please continue to come forward when
you're asked to have your second dose as
well
yesterday the uk celebrated hitting the
latest milestone
of 10 million people being fully
protected from the virus
so to put that into perspective that's
the equivalent of the entire population
of manchester leeds liverpool newcastle
birmingham and bristol combined
having complete protection against
covert 19.
so we're making great strides but this
hasn't happened by accident
the success is down to the hard work of
our staff
incredible planning and delivery so i
want to iterate my thanks
to all of those uh staff and volunteers
everyone involved in delivering our
vaccination program
and i want you also to make sure that
you look after our staff at this
really challenging time i heard today
that
a group of people were protesting
outside a mobile vaccination bus
in nottingham i want to say now that we
will not stand for it
it is of vital importance that you allow
our colleagues to do the job that they
need to do
that you allow them to save lives by
vaccinating people
and as prime minister says you allow our
teams to get us back to the lives that
we love
and that we miss so much i also said at
this press conference two months ago
that it wasn't too late to change your
mind if you haven't yet come forward
that was true then and it's true now our
offer is evergreen
if you've decided that you would like
your vaccination and you're eligible
we have a vaccination for you if you've
had your first dose and you have your
second dose booked in
please also be sure to get it i have my
second dose at the end of march
and i can assure anyone watching or
listening that it's safe
so please go ahead and take up that
opportunity
one area that i know that has rightly
been a concern has been uptake among
people from ethnic minority backgrounds
and that feels really personal to me
both as a gp and as a woman of colour in
this country
and that's why two months ago on behalf
of the nhs i set out our action plan to
boost uptake
across people from ethnic minority
backgrounds and i'm pleased to say we've
made really significant progress
since we set out our plan in february
uptake from all ethnic minority
backgrounds has tripled
outpacing the national average across
all ethnicities
take-up among people from the pakistani
background has more is more than four
times higher than it was in february
and a five-fold increase in people
taking up the vaccine
from a bangladeshi background the
progress is a direct result of a
combination of
nhs teams who know and understand their
communities community and faith leaders
who've worked really closely with us
practical considerations about ramadan
and other local nuances
and really strong vocal backing from
high-profile
people such as bacos nadia hussein
comedian lenny henry and tv star adele
ray
so i want to thank everyone involved in
this effort you've saved lives
but we're not done our job is not done
we will keep offering first stages as
supply
allows and in line with jcv advice on
those who are most at risk
and i echo the pm's reminder that we all
need to keep following the national
guidance
to reduce transmission hospital
admissions and deaths
and we too in the nhs will keep our side
of the bargain looking after you whether
you have covered
or non-covered concerns we want to make
sure that nobody is left behind
so i want to urge everyone eligible to
join the millions
already vaccinated to protect yourselves
and others
so if you're invited to get a vaccine
please come forward
if you're asked or have the symptoms to
have a test please come forward
and if you have other health concerns
please come forward
thank you thanks very much nikki let's
go to
uh questions from uh the public first
annette from lester
oh sorry nick you're gonna do the slides
first sorry let's go to the slides
okay um so uh we'll just take you
through a couple of slides before we go
to questions
and this is a slide that shows the
number of people in hospital recovered
in the uk and you can see since our
first peak on the 12th of april
so just over a year later this is on
sunday the 18th of april
1973 people were in hospital because of
19.
and if you move to the next slide please
which i haven't had the joy of saying
yet
uh the number of people who have
received a vaccination for cavite 19 in
the uk
and you can see what pm and i have just
described where 33 million individuals
actually just saved that now
have received a first ace and of these
over 10 million people have also
received a second dose
thank you great thanks very much nikki
and thanks for
for those sides let's go to annette from
leicester
are there any plans for the daily covid
statistics to include numbers of new
admissions and deaths involving people
who have received a coveted vaccination
if not
why not that is an
excellent question annette the uh
the answer i'm afraid is is simply that
uh i
i cannot give i i don't know uh whether
uh we are we are yet uh able to give you
uh those date or indeed what that
statistic would say if we were able
uh to give it to you and that that's not
because we want to uh
to to to conceal anything from uh people
we i
we simply don't know that data i mean i
suspect the number is is very small but
uh if if indeed there are any but um
nikki if you'd like to comment on this
absolutely thank you prime minister it's
a really good question annette
i think what's really key is that every
week we publish data that looks at both
uh covert statistics vaccination
statistics
and obviously any safety alerts as well
and so although they aren't triangulated
every week those statistics are produced
and we're able to look at those and
understand what that means and how that
influences the vaccine program
thanks very much annette and i mean
clearly people are going to uh
unfortunately people will continue to uh
to die of
uh other causes irrespective of whether
or not they've had
a vaccination but i think your point is
a is a good one
uh let's go to marilyn from london and
marilyn's question is once international
travel resumes on may the 17th
how frequently will the red list travel
countries be reviewed
and what are the requirements for a
country on the red list to be moved to
the amber
or green travel lists thanks marilyn
well the the the answer is that
we keep the uh red list under uh
constant review all countries uh we keep
under
under constant review judge the state of
the pandemic in those countries and this
work is done actually not by uh the
government itself it's done by
uh the joint biosecurity center it's
done by the
the jbc uh they look at uh the
uh the the issue and
uh they will make they will make the
their determination based on
uh what they think uh we need to do and
clearly if they think there's a you know
variant of concern for instance if they
think that the
disease is taking off rapidly uh in that
country or they have any other reason
uh for concern then it will move uh onto
the red list and
uh and downwards uh uh if
uh it's going in in a different
direction so it's the
it's the jbc that does it and we keep it
under constant review
questions from the media please vicky
young of the bbc
uh prime minister follow up to that last
question from marilyn really about the
red list in the past few weeks
tens of thousands of people have
traveled between india and the united
kingdom
why did it take so long to put india on
the red list there are some who wonder
why it took you so long to cancel
your planned trip there and a second
question if i could about climate change
the government you've announced some
very ambitious targets today about
cutting emissions
but there are some who will point to
things such as a coal mine in cumbria
the scrapping of the green homes deal
and wonder whether you really do
have uh the confidence to take the
decisions they're really difficult and
maybe unpopular decisions that will be
needed
to meet those targets oh thanks very
much
vicky the uh decision on india again was
taken by the
uh by the jbc really in response and
to the the state of the pandemic there
you'll recall that at the moment
uh this is a a very the what we're
seeing in india is a result of a variant
under
investigation it hasn't yet been deemed
a variant of concern i think that was
why there was
uh there's been uh the uh delay
and um what peop i think
what the the jbc has decided on on a
purely uh precautionary
basis uh it's necessary now to
uh put india on the red list but i want
to stress that even before that
measures we have measures in place for
everybody coming
from india that are very very tough
indeed so
people coming from india have to uh
quarantine isolate they then uh they
have in addition to filling in the
passenger locator forms and all the
things that you
you know about they then have to take a
test on day two
and on day eight and it's because of
those tests
that we've actually been able to uh
isolate
the cases of the uh the so-called indian
variant
uh the b uh 1.617 i think it is
uh that uh are are currently under
investigation
i think there are slightly over a
hundred such cases that we've identified
here in the
in the uk and clearly were uh following
up all of them following up their
contacts doing
uh the surge testing uh that you would
uh expect
i want to stress that it is still a
variant under investigation not yet
a variant of concern we will look very
carefully at whether it
uh shows any sign of being able to
escape
the uh the vaccines or escape the effect
of the
of the vaccines uh but but that's where
we are at the moment and and
by putting it on the red list of course
by putting india on the red list
what happens now is that anybody coming
from india
has to go immediately into an even more
stringent
uh regime of of hotel uh of hotel
quarantine
and on on your question about um
climate change and uh how we can make
these
uh very considerable uh advances that we
want
uh to make i i just just remind you that
since 1990 the uk
has actually cut emissions uh or
cut emissions on 1990 levels uh by
something like 44
40 to 44 percent and yet the economy
has grown uh by 73
or so i don't see any contradiction
uh vicky between growth and jobs and
building back better and tackling
climate change we can do
uh both together in fact i think we must
do both together i want the uk
to be a global leader in clean
green technology and in high wage high
skill
green jobs that's the that's what we're
aiming to do we think we can do
both uh together and the evidence of the
technological progress that we've made
in the last
20 years i think shows uh that we can
can we go to
emily morgan of itv
thank you prime minister you've set a
target to roll out possibly two
antiviral treatments as autumn do you
have two
treatments specifically in mind that you
know will be available and
if not isn't that a hugely ambitious
target
and if i may on the football do you
really think that you can prevent a
european super league from happening
if the clubs are determined to push
ahead
emily on the antivirals that we've been
discussing uh the obviously we have the
there are various
shots we already have in our locker like
uh dexamethasone i think
rem desavier is also uh is also used in
some cases um and then there you know
there are various other
treatments with uh names that you know
sounding a bit like aztec
divinities uh it was totally muzab
uh and and and various others uh that uh
were certainly
uh you know looking at uh but i think
probably on this one i'm gonna i'm gonna
pass the ball to
uh to to nikki and i'll come back
and say something about football nikki
why don't you say something about it
thanks emily and
so just to recap we really welcome the
introduction of the antiviral task force
and to make sure we really focus on
prevention and treatment in the
community so
managing a rise in infections or new
variants
the nhs has been working internationally
actually to
identify effective treatments for clovid
and
a huge thanks to the over 1 million
people in the uk
who've participated in a research trial
so far
um we know that over 22 000 lives have
already been saved in the uk from the
use of dexamethasone
so your question about sort of what have
we got in the pipeline there are a
number of treatments at the moment that
are being
tested and refined and what we found is
that it's taking about six days to go
from a positive research finding
to put it you know to put that
particular treatment into practice
um so we're trying starting to look at
budesonide and other treatments as well
um and this really gives us
a chance to focus and ramp up pace um
on the use of antivirals particularly in
the community and at home
thanks nikki emily on the football uh
what i would say is that the our first
uh step is clearly to to back the
football authorities in in this country
the
the fa football association the the
premier league in uh the steps that
they're taking to
uh counteract this initiative but be in
no doubt that we don't
uh support it and uh support the
creation of this european super league i
think it's
uh not in the interests of uh of fans
it's not in the interests of
football how can it be right to have a
situation in which you create a kind of
cartel that stops clubs competing
against each other
playing against each other properly with
all the
hope and excitement that gives to the
fans
up and down the country i think he
defends against the basic basic
principles of
uh of of competition and uh if necessary
uh in order to protect that principle of
competition we will
uh seek as as i said uh to uh
to the those bodies earlier on we will
seek a legislative
solution uh but we hope that uh they can
find a way forward
uh themselves can we go to andy bell of
uh of channel five
thank you um you've spoken of
learning to live as much as possible
with the virus
uh prime minister michael gove is in
israel today
we assume to be looking at their version
of a covid passport can we assume that
uh in the months ahead one part of
learning to live with the virus as much
as possible
is that there will be some sort of
domestic covered passport some sort of
covered authentication and in terms of
the football please
um can we assume that do you regard this
as a special case for government
intervening in this sort of area
and what would you say to the the
billionaire owners of these clubs who
presumably if they spoke out would say
look this is our business and government
should uh keep out of it
uh first of all thanks andy first of all
on the
uh on uh kovid's status certification
uh as we call it um don't forget
that under the current uh system under
the step two
rules you don't need any kind of uh
certificate and you won't need
anything on certainly won't need
anything on the may the 17th
uh openings uh assuming that as i say we
can
we can get there which i'm very hopeful
that we will you won't need anything
then
what we are looking at i think any
responsible government would look at is
what ways we can uh use people's
uh evidence of people's coveted status
just to just to open up some of those
things that are really
uh tough and did prove very tough to
open
last year and i wouldn't want to focus
exclusively
andy on on vaccines as also your
immunity
uh status and and testing is also
very useful but we'll be uh you'll be
hearing more about that
uh in uh in due course uh you know
it is as and when we we find it uh
if we indeed we find it useful i think
it i think it may very well be
be useful but we'll be setting it out in
in due course and people certainly don't
need
uh to think about it uh before uh before
may the 17th
and on your point about uh
uh football what would i say to the to
the billionaire
club owners um well i just i said i just
say this that
that these clubs say especially
association football
football was invented and codified in
this country it is part is one of the
great glories of
this country's cultural heritage these
clubs these names
originate from famous towns and cities
in our country
and i don't think it right that they
should be
somehow dislocated from their
hometowns home cities taken and turned
into
international brands and commodity
commodities just
circulate the planet uh propelled by
uh the billions of of banks without any
reference
uh to fans and those who uh who've loved
them all their lives and i i i we
i don't think it right as i said in my
earlier answer to
uh to emily that we should uh forget the
basic principle of
of competition uh which is so important
and gives so much excitement and
and joy to the sport so that's what i
would say to them um
let's go to uh harry cole the son
harry uh thank you prime minister um
what are the odds of our readers being
able to enjoy european holiday
this summer and is it still too soon to
book and when can they book
and on the football um at the leadership
meeting you had today
uh with with community leaders and
football leaders you promised a
legislative bomb
uh if they proceeded with this plan can
you give us some insight into what that
bomb might include
and is it true you're considering a
windfall tax on clubs visa restrictions
uh taking away policing of matches uh
what's what is off the table is anything
off the table
uh thanks very much harry on on your
very good question about
uh about travel we'd love to i'd love to
be able to give uh you
and and your your readers uh uh a a
clear rundown of the countries that we
think may be
uh either red amber or green at this
stage we won't be able to do that yet as
we've
said the global travel task force has
reported but what
what they've said is that we're really
going to need to wait until uh early may
before we can set out which is
uh which countries are on on the list
and you can see the some of the troubles
and
uh some of the problems in uh uh that
some of our friends are
are currently uh having so i think it'd
be you know just premature
uh to to speculate speculate about that
i'm sorry about that
but we will be saying more as soon as we
possibly
can but in the before may the 17th and
uh on the the legislative approach that
we could take
um i don't want to say very much more
about that except to say that
that remains uh something and certainly
something we will
uh bring uh to the forefront if we if we
have to
as you know tracy crouch uh is doing a
fan based
review of the whole uh governance of
football uh how it works trying to
improve things for
uh for fans and trying to address some
of the underlying issues that
we're facing but i think what we want to
do
first of all is uh back the fa
back the uh the premier league and i
hope that we can
uh thwart this proposal before it goes
uh very much further i don't think as i
said i don't think it's in the interests
of
of football or of the or of the fans
let's go to jessica elgott of the
guardian
thank you prime minister um i wonder if
you might give us an update on the
nun johnson vaccine in the uk um
especially given the news out of the us
and the ema today uh that they have
concerns about it would that be a big
blow to our vaccine program especially
vaccinating
the younger cohort of people um if we if
we encountered any difficulties i know
that we're
waiting for its approval and and
secondly on on football i'd like to
to know really what is your own personal
view of the german model of majority fan
ownership of football clubs is that
something you're
instinctively in favor of or or against
and is that something this country could
seriously
consider having here uh okay
uh thanks on jansen i think i'm going to
ask nikki to say something
as well uh we're confident though in the
security
of our supply uh and that we'll be able
to get done what we've uh said we're
going to
uh to do by by the end by by the end of
july jessica so that's that's the
the key thing i get out to get over
about uh about the vaccine supply but
uh absolutely so it's not a vaccine that
we're using at the moment in this
country as you know
and as with any vaccine we'd wait for
mhra approval
and we always take guidance from mhra
and jcvi to
plan our vaccine deployment into sites
accurately and safely
right now the priority is to get your
vaccine if you're offered it
because we have the supply to vaccinate
you if you're eligible
and sorry some fan of fan ownership and
the the
uh the german approach to this jessica i
think that's really a matter for tracy
uh tracy crash in her review i really
wouldn't want to
uh to to preempt uh what she's going to
say but i know
she's uh very interested in in those
sorts of
uh models and and what that may or may
not involve
poor war of having to boast
prime minister you've set out a new
legally binding target to cut emissions
by 78
by 2035 but also to include aviation and
emissions for the first time
does this mean that the third runway at
heathrow is now much less likely
or if it does go ahead will there need
to be cuts at regional airports and if i
may on
greenson lobbying it's sparked a lot of
interest in whether the nolan principles
of public life
have any teeth or relevance anymore do
you agree with the independent office
for police
conduct which in its review of your
links with jennifer r curie concluded
and i quote
it would have been wise for mr johnson
to have declared this as a conflict of
interest
and a failure to do so could have
constituted a breach of the nolan
principles
now those principles include acting with
honesty and integrity
do you believe you acted with honesty
and integrity in your relationship with
mr curie
who claims you conducted your affair in
your marital home
uh well thank you very much paul and on
your on your
first point about uh the
uh about it plans to to build another
runway at heathrow that's a
a matter for the uh for the company
concerned it's a
it's a private uh matter it's uh if
they've got to
to get it through to fund it and to
finance it
themselves and my own views about
that particular matter are well known um
but that doesn't mean that i'm opposed
to aviation it doesn't mean that i don't
believe that
this country has a great future uh in
pioneering low carbon
uh aviation uh the two the two aviation
and
a green future are not mutually
exclusive and they can be
uh they can be done and that's why one
of the
uh the the things that we set out in
that i set out in the ten point
uh plan for the green industrial
revolution uh was to get to a
a jet zero world and the government is
working with
uh partners across industry
to try to achieve that there are all
sorts of promising
looking approaches all sorts of ways in
which we could reduce
carbon emissions from from planes we've
got to do it
in the end humanity is going to need uh
to to fly
and it's going to have to fly in a a
clean
green way and i'm i'm a technological
optimist as i said in my earlier answer
i think to
to vicky young of the of the bbc i think
we can do it and
uh my answer to your second question is
yes
okay everybody thank you very much